+++
title = "2017"
aliases = ["2017"]
author = "WestGrid"
+++

### Airflow around counter-rotating wind turbines

<!-- https://www.westgrid.ca/visualizethis_challenge -->

The second annual *Visualize This!* Challenge asked participants to visualize a 3D fluid flow around two
counter-rotating wind turbines. The provided dataset contained only one time step from the simulation, so participants
had to create a dynamic visualization from the static data. We received many good submissions, with three most
outstanding visualizations shown below.

### First place

The first place was taken by Jarno van der Kolk, a postdoctoral researcher from the University of Ottawa. Jarno's
visualization (shown below) was selected for its overall presentation, with a very informative voice-over. We especially
appreciated the toy conceptual animation rendered entirely in ParaView and the use of programmable sources for rendering
grass, the house, and the roof in the same scene with the turbine blades. The colour scheme for showing the wind speed
was very nice, with red/blue indicating the flow which is faster/slower than the incoming air. Jarno's visualization
provided a clear explanation of what forces exactly drive the blades.

{{< vimeo 246859562 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/246859562" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>

### Second place

The second prize went to Nadya Moisseeva, a PhD student in the Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences at
UBC. Nadya's work (shown below) was selected for its use of several innovative techniques in her visualization:

- use of the Stream Tracer With Custom Source filter through a grid of seed points in a vertical
  cross-section (forcing the streamlines to be redrawn at each height),
- animating the position of multiple integration time contours,
- nice colour selection in the volumetric plots of regions of high/low pressure around the blades,
- semi-transparent vorticity surfaces,
- final multi-layer animation combining seven properties in a single timeline,
- smooth continuous transitions between all animations,
- informative burned-in captions, and
- nice use of several rotation and displacement motions.

{{< vimeo 246879618 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/246879618" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>

### Third place

The third place was taken by Dan MacDonald, Thangam Natarajan, Richard Windeyer, Peter Coppin, and David Steinman, a
joint team from the <a href="https://bsl.mie.utoronto.ca" target="_blank">Biomedical Simulation Laboratory</a> of the
University of Toronto and the <a href="https://www2.ocadu.ca/research/connection/perceptual-artifacts-lab"
target="_blank">Perceptual Artifacts Laboratory</a> of OCAD University. Their visualization (shown below) was selected
for its unique use of Blender's game engine to let a user walk through the ParaView-created scene, toggle the visibility
of the various physical components, and for coupling the visual scene with the SuperCollider server to produce
on-the-fly audio from selected Q-criterion under the microphone in Blender's game engine.

{{< vimeo 246882338 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/246882338" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>
