+++
title = "2018"
aliases = ["2018"]
author = "WestGrid"
+++

In the third annual *Visualize This!* competition participants could select their dataset: a bio-molecular dynamics
simulation or a rich set of linked humanities data.

### Interaction of a large protein structure with a cell's membrane

The bio-molecular dynamics dataset was taken from a coarse-grained Gromacs simulation of interaction of a large protein
structure with a cell's membrane. A cell's membrane is typically composed of two leaflets (single molecular layers),
comprised in this model of pure phosphatidylcholine (POPC) lipid molecules. The protein structure is a P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) embedded into the cell's membrane. Such proteins are responsible for the translocation of a wide range of
compounds across membranes.

A simple visualization with <a href="https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd" target="_blank">VMD</a> (below) shows the
horizontal cell membrane along with the embedded vertical protein. To further differentiate the two, we rendered the
protein beads as larger spheres.

![cell membrane with embedded protein](../images/both.png "cell membrane with embedded protein")

This simulation shows that the P-gp molecule acts as a lipid transporter protein, flipping membrane’s lipids from the
inner to the outer leaflet. We asked participants to visualize this process, finding those lipids that bind to the
protein.

### Linked humanities data

The Orlando British Women's Writing Dataset (Release 1: Biography and Bibliography) provided a rich set of linked open
data representing women's literary history from the beginnings to the present, concentrated on writing in English in the
British Isles but with tentacles out to other languages, literary traditions, and parts of the world. The competition
dataset contained 3,321,746 triples stored in the Resource Description Framework (RDF) format which is a standard format
for storing linked data called graphs.

To get an idea of the type of information in the dataset, you can browse the <a href="https://beta.cwrc.ca"
target="_blank">Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory</a> (CWRC) ontology's <a
href="http://sparql.cwrc.ca/ontologies/cwrc-preamble-EN.html#competency" target="_blank">competency questions</a>. For
the purpose of this competition, we suggested to address some more focused questions in the provided dataset.

### First place

The first place was taken by Philippe Nazair, a Data Visualization Developer at Université du Québec à Rimouski and part
of <a href="https://meridian.cs.dal.ca" target="_blank">the MERIDIAN consortium</a>. Philippe's visualization is
implemented as a static website with two layers: a graph viewer using the <a
href="https://github.com/vasturiano/3d-force-graph" target="_blank">3d-force-graph web component</a>, and a map viewer
implemented with <a href="https://leafletjs.com" target="_blank">Leaflet</a> to display markers on the map and written
biographies from <a href="http://orlando.cambridge.org" target="_blank">Cambridge's Orlando</a> author's page found in
the dataset. Below you can see a screen-capture video showing different interactions on this site. All JSON files for
the visualization were created with a Python backend. We especially appreciated sample graphs for radical and liberal
ideologies and other groups, as well as the ability to build more complex graphs by selecting a predicate and setting it
to a certain value, e.g. `hasActiveInvolvementIn = socialism`, or multiple values; each graph is limited to one
predicate. Individual graph nodes can be displayed as either text or draggable spheres.

{{< vimeo 306261749 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/306261749" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>

### Second place

The second prize went to Usman Alim and Roberta Cabral Ramos Mota from the Department of Computer Science at the
University of Calgary. Below you can watch one of their visualizations (rendered with OSPRay in ParaView) showing the
protein cavity and two *highly-interacting* PO4 beads with the colour representing time step. This work was selected for
their skillful use of Python scripting for the bulk of the analysis: using <a href="https://www.mdanalysis.org"
target="_blank">MDAnalysis</a> library for identifying closely interacting membrane beads, and writing bead positions in
VTK to be rendered in ParaView. You can download an edited version of their Python analysis script [here](../analysis.py).

{{< vimeo 306277152 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/306277152" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>

### Third place

The third place was taken by Catherine Winters from the <a href="https://www.lib.sfu.ca/help/publish/dh/dhil"
target="_blank">Digital Humanities Innovation Lab</a> at Simon Fraser University. This visualization is powered by <a
href="https://d3js.org" target="_blank">D3.js</a> and <a href="https://threejs.org" target="_blank">Three.js</a>, with
all JSON data files produced with Python scripting. Not all features of this visualization are complete, so we are not
showing it here, but it is likely to remain a side project in the lab over the next few months, with the promise to show
clustering based on ideology, religion, or geographic proximity.

<!-- https://westgrid.github.io/visualizeThis -->
<!-- https://www.computecanada.ca/research-portal/national-services/visualization -->
<!-- <a href="link" target="_blank">text</a> -->
