+++
title = "2019"
aliases = ["2019"]
author = "WestGrid"
+++

### Incompressible transitional air flow over a wind turbine section

The theme of the 2019 challenge was distributed rendering, i.e. visualization of very large datasets that require
parallel rendering on a cluster. Participants could use either their own data or the supplied dataset kindly provided
for this competition by Joshua Brinkerhoff (UBC Okanagan). This dataset came from an OpenFOAM numerical simulation of
incompressible transitional air flow over a wind turbine section.

### First place

The first place was taken by Thierry Villeneuve, a Ph.D. student from the Department of Mechanical Engineering at
Université Laval, for his time-dependent 3D volume rendering of the vorticity magnitude in a turbulent turbine wake. The
dataset was taken from Thierry's own CFD model using a DDES (Delayed Detached-Eddy simulation) approach with a domain
composed of approximately 10<sup>8</sup> cells. The simulation has been performed on Compute Canada's Niagara cluster
using 10 nodes (400 cores) and took about two months. The output with the three components of the vorticity vector was
saved every 20 time steps, resulting in ~2200 frames. The blue / green semi-opaque regions represent low-vorticity
zones, while the red regions show high-vorticity zones.

{{< vimeo 380107780 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/380107780" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>

### Second place

The second place went to Yohai Meiron, a Postdoctoral Fellow from the Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics at the
University of Toronto, for his demonstration of VTK-m filters and rendering using the competition's "default"
dataset. <a href="http://m.vtk.org" target="_blank">VTK-m</a> is a scientific visualization toolkit for multi-core
processor architectures (both CPUs and GPUs). With an interface currently only in C++, VTK-m is a complete rewrite of
the serial VTK algorithms and functions. Some functionality of VTK-m could be used through ParaView and VisIt.

While VTK-m supports MPI through a class called `PartitionedDataSet`, many if not most of its built-in algorithms do not
know how to handle this class. The solution was to use another library called <a
href="https://github.com/Alpine-DAV/vtk-h" target="_blank">VTK-h</a> that is basically a wrapper around VTK-m to enable
hybrid parallelism.

The video below use four different rendering techniques. Of these the most interesting visually is the last part showing
volumetric rendering of the z-component of the vorticity vector with nice coherent structures above and below the
airfoil, and a gap between the lower structure and the airfoil itself.

{{< vimeo 380126028 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/380126028" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>

### Third place

The third place was taken by Joshua Ludwig, a Ph.D. Student in Plasma Physics from the University of Alberta. His video
(below) was rendered using Joshua's own parallel ray tracing rendering code on 5 nodes (160 cores) on Compute Canada's
Graham cluster.

The video shows plasma electron density (low in blue and high in red). The camera is moving at the speed of light to
follow a short high intensity laser pulse (not shown). This laser pulse is so intense that it expels all the plasma
electrons from its path and creates a bubble-like feature in the plasma. This bubble feature still contains positively
charged ions due to their large mass and hence has strong electric fields that pull electrons into the bubble and
accelerate them as they ride along with the laser pulse. This mechanism is called Relativistic Laser Wakefield
Acceleration.

The simulation was performed on 32 nodes (1280 cores) of Compute Canada's Niagara cluster using OSIRIS, a 3D fully
relativistic Particle-in-Cell plasma modelling code. It solved Maxwell's equations for the electric and magnetic fields
on a 3600x1800x1800 grid covering the domain 160x120x120&micro;m with ~23 billion electron particles. The output used
specifically to make this video was about 20TB.

{{< vimeo 380129427 >}}
<sup>(Or click <a href="https://vimeo.com/380129427" target="_blank">here</a> to watch this video directly on
Vimeo.)</sup>
